Release notes v0.42.0 (#2811)
grafana/k6: release notes/v0.42.0.md

k6 v0.42.0 is here and it brings a few exciting updates! :tada:

## New Features

### Experimental Prometheus Remote Write Output [#2784](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2784)

> Added a new builtin Output to any [Prometheus Remote Write](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LPhVRSFkGNSuU1fBd81ulhsCPR4hkSZyyBj1SZ8fWOM/edit) implementations (e.g. [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#remote-write-receiver), [Mimir](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/reference-http-api/#remote-write)). This is an experimental API and it could change in the future introducing breaking changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Added a new builtin Output to any [Prometheus Remote Write](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LPhVRSFkGNSuU1fBd81ulhsCPR4hkSZyyBj1SZ8fWOM/edit) implementations (e.g. [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#remote-write-receiver), [Mimir](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/reference-http-api/#remote-write)). This is an experimental feature and it could change in the future introducing breaking changes.
```

The k6 parts is not an API arguably ;)

Author: For API I meant the k6 CLI's commands..for example removing the `experimental-` or adding the feature for setting the string URI. I will try to rephrase.

> Added a new builtin Output to any [Prometheus Remote Write](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LPhVRSFkGNSuU1fBd81ulhsCPR4hkSZyyBj1SZ8fWOM/edit) implementations (e.g. [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#remote-write-receiver), [Mimir](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/reference-http-api/#remote-write)). This is an experimental API and it could change in the future introducing breaking changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release brings a new builtin Output to any [Prometheus Remote Write](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LPhVRSFkGNSuU1fBd81ulhsCPR4hkSZyyBj1SZ8fWOM/edit) implementations (e.g. [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#remote-write-receiver), [Mimir](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/reference-http-api/#remote-write)). This is an experimental feature, and future releases could introduce breaking changes.
```

> Below is a simple example of using the Output in a `k6 run` command using the defaults options like the Remote Write server URL (http://localhost:9090/api/v1/write):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a simple example of using the new output in a `k6 run` command using the defaults options like the Remote Write server URL (http://localhost:9090/api/v1/write):
```

It seems strange to me to have the `O` uppercase and calling it "the output" makes it sound as it is the only output to me or like if it's something we didn't have anything now.

> Below is a simple example of using the Output in a `k6 run` command using the defaults options like the Remote Write server URL (http://localhost:9090/api/v1/write):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example uses `k6 run` with the new output. It uses the defaults options, such as the Remote Write server URL (http://localhost:9090/api/v1/write):
```

```sh
k6 run -o experimental-prometheus-rw script.js
```

> It supports the new and convenient experimental [Native Histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/histograms) feature recently added in Prometheus >= `v2.40.0`. It is not enabled by default but we expect to make it the default way for mapping k6's [Trend metrics](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-metrics/trend) when it is marked as mature enough from the Prometheus' project and supported by more Remote Write's implementation. For now, a specific option allows to enable it, setting `K6_PROMETHEUS_RW_TREND_AS_NATIVE_HISTOGRAM` equals `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It supports the new and convenient experimental [Native Histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/histograms) feature recently added in Prometheus >= `v2.40.0`. It is not enabled by default but we expect to make it the default way for mapping k6's [Trend metrics](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-metrics/trend) when it is marked as mature enough from the Prometheus' project and supported by more Remote Write's implementation. For now, if you want to use it you need to set `K6_PROMETHEUS_RW_TREND_AS_NATIVE_HISTOGRAM` to `true`. 
```

> It supports the new and convenient experimental [Native Histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/histograms) feature recently added in Prometheus >= `v2.40.0`. It is not enabled by default but we expect to make it the default way for mapping k6's [Trend metrics](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-metrics/trend) when it is marked as mature enough from the Prometheus' project and supported by more Remote Write's implementation. For now, a specific option allows to enable it, setting `K6_PROMETHEUS_RW_TREND_AS_NATIVE_HISTOGRAM` equals `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It supports the new and convenient experimental [Native Histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/histograms) feature, added in Prometheus `v2.40.0`. It's not enabled by default, but we expect to make it the default way to map k6 [Trend metrics](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-metrics/trend) once the Prometheus' project signals that its mature enough and supported by more Remote Write's implementation. For now, if you want to use it, you need to set `K6_PROMETHEUS_RW_TREND_AS_NATIVE_HISTOGRAM` to `true`.
```

Reviewer 2: > supported by more Remote Write's implementation

I'm unclear about this one. Maybe

> ...when it supports more Remote Write implementations?

or 

> ...when more Remote Write implementations support it.

Something else?

> A complete documentation with more examples, use cases and available configurations can be find in the [docs](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/prometheus-rw).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find [complete documentation](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/prometheus-rw) with more examples, use cases, and available configurations.
```

### More features for the experimental websockets module [#2786](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2786) 

The `k6/experimental/websockets` module that we announced in [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/releases/tag/v0.40.0) release got an update that extends its functionality.

It brings some useful features that `k6/ws` module has, like cookies, custom headers, compression and tags customization support, and the additional syntax of defining the event handlers (`onopen`, `onmessage`, etc) and `ping`/`pong` functionality.

<details>

> <summary> Expand to see an example of new WebSockets's functionality</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<summary> Expand to see an example of the new WebSockets functionality</summary>
```

> This example showcases how to customize tags for a WebScoket connection, setup handlers using new `on*` syntax, and demonstrates `ping`/`pong` feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example customizes tags for a WebScoket connection, sets up handlers using the new `on*` syntax, and demonstrates a `ping`/`pong` feature.
```

Reviewer 2: As a verb, it's "set up", and as a noun it's "setup". Annoying, I know :-(.

        ws.close()
        
    }, 2000);

    ws.onclose = () => {
        clearTimeout(timeout1id);

        console.log('disconnected')
    }

    
    ws.onping = () => {
        console.log("PING!")
    }

    ws.onpong = () => {
        console.log("PONG!")
    }

    // Multiple event handlers on the same event
    ws.addEventListener("pong", () => {
        console.log("OTHER PONG!")
    })

    ws.onmessage = (m) => {
        let parsed = parseInt(m.data, 10)
        if (Number.isNaN(parsed)) {
            console.log('Not a number received: ', m.data)

            return
        }

        console.log(`Roundtrip time: ${Date.now() - parsed} ms`);        

        let timeoutId = setTimeout(function() {
            if (ws.readyState == CLOSED_STATE) {
                console.log("Socket closed, not sending anything");

                clearTimeout(timeoutId);
                return;
            }

            ws.send(Date.now().toString())
        }, 500);
    }   

    ws.onerror = (e) => {
        if (e.error != "websocket: close sent") {
            console.log('An unexpected error occurred: ', e.error);
        }
    };  
};
```
</details>

> You can find documentation and other examples of using the module in the [docs](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-experimental/websockets).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [module docs](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-experimental/websockets) have a complete reference, and some examples.
```

### Wildcard support for `hosts` option [#2747](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2747)

> Thanks to the great effort from @eugercek, the [hosts](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/k6-options/reference/#hosts) option now accepts domains that contain a wildcard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to the great effort from @eugercek, the [hosts](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/k6-options/reference/#hosts) option now accepts domains that contain a wildcard at the beginning.
```

I think this is the only case where `*` is possible. Also maybe say whether that will map only 1 subdomain or mor, I don't remember that detail.

Maybe a sentence on what that can be used for will be nice.

```js
export const options = {
  hosts: {
    '*.k6.io': '1.2.3.4',
  },
}
```

### Enhancements, and UX improvements

> - [#2660](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2660) Pre-loading the operating system TLS certificates. Thanks, @tbourrely.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#2660](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2660) Pre-loads the operating system TLS certificates. Thanks, @tbourrely.
```

> - [#2773](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2773) Ensures that JavaScript runtime makes the only copy of the exports for each module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#2773](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2773) Ensures that JavaScript runtime makes only one copy of the exports for each module including built-in ones.
```

> - [#2791](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2791) Runs `setup()` and `teardown()` only if they are defined in a script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#2791](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2791) Initialize VUS for `setup()` and `teardown()` only if they are defined in the script.
```

Reviewer 2: Perhaps "initializes" so that every item in the list has the same grammar.

Author: ```suggestion
- [#2791](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2791) Initializes VUs for `setup()` and `teardown()` only if they are defined in the script.
```

## Breaking changes

> 

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we put this section at the top? I like the trend that @mstoykov started. I think it shows a lot of user respect that put breaks first, even if they're super minor.

> - [#2712](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2712) `k6/ws` return HTTP response for failed connections instead of an undefined behavior. Thanks, @brietaylor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#2712](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2712) `k6/ws` returns an HTTP response for failed connections instead of an undefined behavior. Thanks, @brietaylor.
```

## Bug fixes

> - [#2759](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2759) Ensure the evaluation of thresholds over trend metrics' median.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#2759](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2759) Ensures the evaluation of thresholds over trend metrics' median.
```

> - [#2759](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2789) Fixed a few potential Output data races for interrupted test runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#2759](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2789) Fixes a few potential Output data races for interrupted test runs.
```

> - [#2767](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2767) Fix emission of `ws_session_duration` when setup throws an error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#2767](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2767) Fixes the emission of `ws_session_duration` when setup throws an error.
```

## Maintenance and internal improvements

We had a few minor changes in this release:

- [#2757](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2757) goja runtime has been updated.
- [#2768](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2768) `WS.Connect()` has been refactored.
- [#2770](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2770) Refactor parts of js module.
- [#2782](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2782) Covered more relative path test cases for `require` and `open`.
- [#2789](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2789), [#2792](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2792), [#2795](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2795), [#2796](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2796) Improved stability of the integration tests.

> - [#2791](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2777) Performance optimization of the internal Trie implementation. Thanks, @eugercek.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#2791](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2777) Optimized the performance of the internal Trie implementation. Thanks, @eugercek.
```

> k6 v0.42.0 is here and it brings a few exciting updates! :tada:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
k6 v0.42.0 is here!  :tada:

This release includes:
- A tiny breaking change to improve Websockets response handling.
- More features in our experimental modules
- Wildcard support for `hosts` 
- Some bug fixes, UX improvements, and maintenance
```

Author: ```suggestion
k6 v0.42.0 is here!  :tada:

This release includes:
- A tiny breaking change to improve WebSockets response handling.
- A new experimental output.
- More features in our experimental WebSocket module.
- Wildcard support for `hosts`.
- Some bug fixes, UX improvements, and maintenance
```
@MattDodsonEnglish polished a bit more, WDYT?

Reviewer 2: LGTM!

The following example uses `k6 run` with the new output. It uses the defaults options, such as the Remote Write server URL (http://localhost:9090/api/v1/write):

```sh
k6 run -o experimental-prometheus-rw script.js
```

It supports the new and convenient experimental [Native Histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/histograms) feature, added in Prometheus `v2.40.0`. It's not enabled by default, but we expect to make it the default way to map k6 [Trend metrics](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-metrics/trend) once the Prometheus' project signals that its mature enough and when more Remote Write implementations support it. For now, if you want to use it, you need to set `K6_PROMETHEUS_RW_TREND_AS_NATIVE_HISTOGRAM` to `true`.

You can find [complete documentation](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/prometheus-rw) with more examples, use cases, and available configurations.

### More features for the experimental websockets module [#2786](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2786) 

> The `k6/experimental/websockets` module that we announced in [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/releases/tag/v0.40.0) release got an update that extends its functionality.

Reviewer 3: Let's link to the xk6-websockets repo.

And we didn't do this in the v0.40.0 release notes, but we should explain _why_ we're introducing an experimental WS module that mostly mimics what `k6/ws` does.

We should explain this, mentioning what our goal for the experimental module is (will it eventually replace `k6/ws`?), what the differences are, and the current state of the experimental module. Users will probably be wondering when/if they should start using it over `k6/ws`.

Maybe some of this is a better fit for the documentation itself (I've yet to review https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/933/), but we should at least mention here what the current status of the project is after these updates.

Author: >We should explain this, mentioning what our goal for the experimental module is (will it eventually replace k6/ws?), what the differences are, and the current state of the experimental module. Users will probably be wondering when/if they should start using it over k6/ws.

We should write this detailed info in the documentation then we could link it here. I think it is important enough to have it as permanent information and not in one specific release note. /cc @olegbespalov 

>Maybe some of this is a better fit for the documentation itself (I've yet to review https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/933), but we should at least mention here what the current status of the project is after these updates.

@olegbespalov can you help here?

Reviewer 3: @olegbespalov I don't think we need to have a well-defined roadmap to make a short comment here about the project goals (replacing `k6/ws`?), and its current state (beyond just "experimental"; should people using `k6/ws` migrate to it, or people writing new WS scripts start using it instead of `k6/ws`?).

I think we missed the chance to mention the project goals when it was introduced in v0.40.0, so that can be done in the official documentation. But since we're announcing these updates here, we should at least expand on the status of it.

So maybe something like:

> This is still an experimental module, but with the recent changes we think it's usable for most users. So whether you're writing a new WebSocket test, or currently using the `k6/ws` module, we invite you to give it a try, and report any issues in the project's [issue tracker](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-websockets/issues).

Reviewer 4: >  I don't think we need to have a well-defined roadmap to make a short comment here about the project goals (replacing k6/ws?)

Not sure that it's the right time to commit that it replace the `k6/ws`, but the suggested sentence looks great :heart: , so I'm up to add this to the current release notes. 

Do you want me to add this, or wanna do this by yourself?

Author: @olegbespalov I've added it. I think this now conflicts a bit with the warning in the documentation which it is very alarming. For example:

>use at your own risk
 
If possible, we should relax and make it more welcoming.

Reviewer 4: > use at your own risk

It's a default warning that shows to all experimental extensions, I agree that it's a bit alarming, but probably it's better to tackle this separately, keeping in mind all the extensions.

Reviewer 4: But I've tried to use @imiric 's words magic to make the landing page moe welcoming, for now, hope that works :crossed_fingers:

> It brings some useful features that `k6/ws` module has, like cookies, custom headers, compression and tags customization support, and the additional syntax of defining the event handlers (`onopen`, `onmessage`, etc) and `ping`/`pong` functionality.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It brings some useful features that the `k6/ws` module already has, like cookies, custom headers, compression and tags customization support, the syntax to define event handlers (`onopen`, `onmessage`, etc.) and `ping`/`pong` functionality.
```

<details>
<summary> Expand to see an example of the new WebSockets functionality</summary>

> This example customizes tags for a WebScoket connection, sets up handlers using the new `on*` syntax, and demonstrates a `ping`/`pong` feature.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This example customizes tags for a WebSocket connection, sets up handlers using the new `on*` syntax, and demonstrates the `ping`/`pong` feature.
```

```javascript
import { WebSocket } from "k6/experimental/websockets"
import { setTimeout, clearTimeout, setInterval, clearInterval } from "k6/experimental/timers"

const CLOSED_STATE = 3

export default function () {
    var url = "ws://localhost:10000";
    var params = { "tags": { "my_tag": "hello" } };

>     let ws = new WebSocket(url, null, params)

Reviewer 3: Hate to point out style issues :sweat_smile:, but this example doesn't use semi-colons and `var`/`let` consistently.

Let's use semi-colons everywhere, `const` where possible, and `let` everywhere else.

Also, maybe 2-space indentation, which is mostly the standard in JS. And, yes, we should update our sample scripts...

Author: It should be fixed by https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2811/commits/490cd786f1d3ebe201a2e425ea84bb080ff2b727

    })

    ws.onmessage = (m) => {
        let parsed = parseInt(m.data, 10)
        if (Number.isNaN(parsed)) {
            console.log('Not a number received: ', m.data)

            return
        }

        console.log(`Roundtrip time: ${Date.now() - parsed} ms`);        

        let timeoutId = setTimeout(function() {
            if (ws.readyState == CLOSED_STATE) {
                console.log("Socket closed, not sending anything");

                clearTimeout(timeoutId);
                return;
            }

            ws.send(Date.now().toString())
        }, 500);
    }   

    ws.onerror = (e) => {
        if (e.error != "websocket: close sent") {
            console.log('An unexpected error occurred: ', e.error);
        }
    };  
};
```
</details>

The [module docs](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-experimental/websockets) have a complete reference, and some examples.

### Wildcard support for `hosts` option [#2747](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2747)

Thanks to the great effort from @eugercek, the [hosts](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/k6-options/reference/#hosts) option now accepts domains that contain a wildcard at the beginning.

> It can be helpful for setting multiple subdomains of the same domain, so instead of setting `subdomain1.k6.io': '1.2.3.4', 'subdomain2.k6.io': '1.2.3.4'` it is possible to use the wildcard for setting directly `*.test.k6.io: '1.2.3.4'`.

Reviewer 3: So that it matches the example.

```suggestion
It can be helpful for setting multiple subdomains of the same domain, so instead of setting `subdomain1.k6.io': '1.2.3.4', 'subdomain2.k6.io': '1.2.3.4'` it is possible to use the wildcard for setting directly `*.k6.io: '1.2.3.4'`.
```

You can find [complete documentation](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/prometheus-rw) with more examples, use cases, and available configurations.

### More features for the experimental websockets module [#2786](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2786) 

The `k6/experimental/websockets` module that we announced in the [v0.40.0 release](https://github.com/grafana/k6/releases/tag/v0.40.0) got an update that extends its functionality.

It brings some useful features that the `k6/ws` module already has, like cookies, custom headers, compression and tags customization support, the syntax to define event handlers (`onopen`, `onmessage`, etc.) and `ping`/`pong` functionality.

<details>
<summary> Expand to see an example of the new WebSockets functionality</summary>

This example customizes tags for a WebSocket connection, sets up handlers using the new `on*` syntax, and demonstrates the `ping`/`pong` feature.

```javascript
import { WebSocket } from "k6/experimental/websockets";
import {
  setTimeout,
  clearTimeout,
  setInterval,
  clearInterval
} from "k6/experimental/timers";

const CLOSED_STATE = 3

export default function () {

>   var url = "ws://localhost:10000";
>   var params = {
>     "tags": {
>       "my_tag": "hello"
>     }
>   };
> 
>   let ws = new WebSocket(url, null, params);

Reviewer 4: Just to address @imiric 's requeest about the const
```suggestion
  const params = {
    "tags": {
      "my_tag": "hello"
    }
  };

  const ws = new WebSocket('ws://localhost:10000', null, params);
```

The following example uses `k6 run` with the new output. It uses the defaults options, such as the Remote Write server URL (http://localhost:9090/api/v1/write):

```sh
k6 run -o experimental-prometheus-rw script.js
```

It supports the new and convenient experimental [Native Histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/histograms) feature, added in Prometheus `v2.40.0`. It's not enabled by default, but we expect to make it the default way to map k6 [Trend metrics](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-metrics/trend) once the Prometheus project signals that its mature enough and when more Remote Write implementations support it. For now, if you want to use it, you need to set the environment variable `K6_PROMETHEUS_RW_TREND_AS_NATIVE_HISTOGRAM` to `true`.

> You can find [complete documentation](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/prometheus-rw) with more examples, use cases, and available configurations.

Author: ```suggestion
You can find [complete documentation](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/prometheus-remote-write) with more examples, use cases, and available configurations.
```

    console.log(`Roundtrip time: ${Date.now() - parsed} ms`);

    let timeoutId = setTimeout(function () {
      if (ws.readyState == CLOSED_STATE) {
        console.log("Socket closed, not sending anything");

        clearTimeout(timeoutId);
        return;
      }

      ws.send(Date.now().toString());
    }, 500);
  };

  ws.onerror = (e) => {
    if (e.error != "websocket: close sent") {
      console.log('An unexpected error occurred: ', e.error);
    }
  };
};
```
</details>

The [module docs](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-experimental/websockets) has a complete reference, and some examples.

### Wildcard support for `hosts` option [#2747](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2747)

Thanks to the great effort from @eugercek, the [hosts](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/k6-options/reference/#hosts) option now accepts domains that contain a wildcard at the beginning.
It can be helpful for setting multiple subdomains of the same domain, so instead of setting `subdomain1.k6.io': '1.2.3.4', 'subdomain2.k6.io': '1.2.3.4'` it is possible to use the wildcard for setting directly `*.k6.io: '1.2.3.4'`.

```js
export const options = {
  hosts: {
    '*.k6.io': '1.2.3.4',
  },
}
```

> ### Enhancements, and UX improvements

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Enhancements and UX improvements
```

- [#2660](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2660) Pre-loads the operating system TLS certificates. Thanks, @tbourrely.

> - [#2773](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2773) Ensures that JavaScript runtime makes only one copy of the exports for each module including built-in ones.

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this be in the bugfixes section?

Author: It seems it was an undefined behaviour before so I interpret it as an improvement. I defer to @mstoykov.

Reviewer 5: I am pretty sure it was a minor bug. Not so much "undefined behavior", rather it was "unintended" :smile:
